DIY Mini Lathe
##############
:date: 2012-12-23 14:27
:author: moop
:category: Things
:tags: Mini Lathe
:slug: diy-mini-lathe
:status: published

|Mini Lathe|

I needed some smooth round parts recently for some models I was building
and chose to take an unconventional approach by building a mini lathe on
which to turn them.

The parts were designed in Draftsight and cut from 3mm ply on
`Nottingham Hackspace's <http://www.nottinghack.co.uk/>`__ laser cutter.
The lathe is built from two finger jointed boxes on a base plate. One of
the two boxes has plates screwed inside and outside of the faces to hold
a pair of bearings that support a free spinning motor shaft. The second
box has an old GWS brushless motor mounted inside. The friction fit
seems sturdy enough but two rails of beech engine bearer stock are
screwed to the sides for extra rigidity and the base is clamped to a
worktop to reduce vibration.

A suitable electronic speed controller and lithium polymer battery
provide power to the motor. Control signals for the ESC are provided by
a cheap servo tester.

[gallery ids="19,30,33"]

The work piece is drilled out slightly smaller than the two shafts and
threaded on. The friction fit acts as a clutch helping to prevent damage
to the motor or drawing excess current and puffing the battery if it
stalls.

For tooling I used various forms of sandpaper and a craft knife.
Anything that will cut or erode the workpiece without stalling the motor
should work okay. I've found it takes a delicate touch but it is easy to
shape the workpiece with some practice.

[gallery ids="35,43,11"]

There are a few downsides to the simple construction: the rails need to
be unscrewed and the boxes removed to insert or remove the work piece,
and the lathe is only suitable for turning very soft wood such as balsa
dowel. Regardless of this the very low cost and simple task required of
it it did an excellent job, though I won't take responsibility for any
fingers lost attempting to replicate it.

.. |Mini Lathe| image:: http://www.moop.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/2012-12-23-12.05.48.jpg
   :class: alignnone wp-image-7
   :width: 933px
   :height: 559px
   :target: http://www.moop.org.uk/index.php/2012/12/23/diy-mini-lathe/2012-12-23-12-05-48/
